---
layout: tutorial
title: Foreword
permalink: /tutorials/00-foreword
number: 0
---

> ### TL;DR
> This foreword contains these elements:
>
> * An overview of what the tutorial series will be all about;
> * A description of the game we're building during this tutorial series;
> * Information about how to set up your development environment. 

### Tutorial Series

In this series, we will be helping you build your first game with `engo`. We will start from scratch, and work
our way up to a fully-playable game. We will cover topics as:

* The **Entity-Component-System** paradigm
* Changing **scenes** within engo
* Writing and using your first **custom Shader**
* Adding **sounds effects** and **ambiance music** to the game
* And probably much more!

In case something wasn't covered that you would very much like explained, drop us a comment at 
[Gitter](https://gitter.im/EngoEngine/engo), or [create an issue at 
GitHub](https://github.com/EngoEngine/engoengine.github.io/issues/new) to request improvements of this tutorial series.  

### The Game
The game we will be building, looks a lot like [Mini Metro](http://store.steampowered.com/app/287980/). In that game, 
cities are popping up which you will have to connect with metro lines. More and more people will want to travel from
various cities, making the game harder and harder, until the travelers have to wait too long and it's game over. 

In our game, we won't be connecting travelers and cities with metro lines. Instead, we're building highways. This has
quite some interesting features:

* As two cities become more and more connected, the welfare (and thus the amount of travelers) increases;
* You may want to add public transportation, i.e. buses, for them to use instead of the car;
* Trucks and vans might slow down the transportation network, as they usually tend to drive at a slower pace;
* Make up your own laws when it comes to taxes (gas, mileage, etc.), but also when it comes to how fast different
types of vehicles can drive on various lanes. 
* You can connect two highways and get an intersection; there's no need for this to happen in cities.

One can think of much more interesting features, and we could fill a whole page just listing ideas, but for now, let's
teach you how to set up your own development environment. 

### Development Environment
For the moment, you can use Windows, Linux and OSX. We do want to note that Windows is the less-supported one of those
at the moment (missing [audio support](https://github.com/EngoEngine/engo/issues/174)) - but that's something we are 
working on. 

> #### Build-Time Dependencies
> * Linux: `sudo apt-get install libopenal-dev libglu1-mesa-dev freeglut3-dev mesa-common-dev xorg-dev libgl1-mesa-dev`
> * Windows: If you're running on Windows you'll need a gcc compiler that the go tool can use and have `gcc.exe` in your PATH environmental variable. We recommend [Mingw](http://mingw-w64.org/doku.php/start) since it has been tested.
> * OSX: No known dependencies.
>
> Note that you will only need these installed when you *build* the game; you will not need these when you want to
> *run* the game. You will probably need the 'runtime' version of those libraries though (instead of the `-dev` ones),
> if you want to run the game. 
 
In any of those cases, you will need to [install the latest version of Go](https://golang.org/dl/). Make sure you 
correctly set your `$GOROOT` (which should point to the installation directory of Go, and your `$GOPATH`, which is
basically the root of all your Go projects. Both of these are 
[environment variables](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Environment_variable). 

Within this `$GOPATH` directory, you will want to create a directory called `src`. What you want to do now, is open
up a terminal / command prompt, go to this location (using the `cd` command), and then type in the following Go command:
`go get -u engo.io/engo`

This command will fetch `engo` from the repository, including all its dependencies. 

Now, you will want to create your own project directory for your own game. In Go, it is customary that the source code
of these projects can be found within code repositories, such as GitHub and Bitbucket. The location of these 
repositories makes up the "import path" of such a Go project. We should create this directory structure within the `src`
folder of the `$GOPATH`. 

> #### Example
> Our GitHub username is `EngoEngine`, and our project is going to be called `TrafficManager`. We are hosting the repository on 
> GitHub. This means we want to ensure that this path exists: `$GOPATH/src/github.com/EngoEngine/TrafficManager`. 

Within this directory, we will be creating our game. All our files will be within this directory, and we will be 
executing all `go`-commands (such as `go build` and `go run`) from this directory (in other words: this directory
is our working directory). 

<div class="button-group stacked">
<a class="button" href="/tutorials/01-hello-world">Continue to Tutorial 1: <i>Hello World</i> &raquo;</a>
</div>
