---
layout: tutorial
title: HUD
permalink: /tutorials/04-hud
number: 4
---

In this tutorial, we will create a Heads-Up display, or HUD, that can provide
information to the player about things like how much money they have at the
moment, details about the currently selected city, etc.

> #### Recap
> Remember what we did in [the last tutorial](/tutorials/03-camera-movement)? <br>
> We added the `KeyboardScroller`, `EdgeScroller` and `MouseZoomer` to allow camera movements.  

> #### Final Code
> The final code **for tutorial 4** is available
> [here at GitHub](https://github.com/EngoEngine/TrafficManager/tree/04-hud).

### What makes HUD so special?

You might ask, what makes an HUD different from, say, the Cities we added in the
previous tutorial? Good question! Once we get a map size bigger than the game
window, we'll be able to scroll around our map. Some components we don't want to
move when we move the camera. The HUD shader option makes it so these components
do not move as you pan around the game world.

### Creating the HUD

Let's get started creating the HUD entities. We'll create a 200x200 light gray,
partially transparent HUD at the bottom left corner of the screen.

#### Space component

Getting the dimensions for the SpaceComponent is easy, but we need a way to
properly position our HUD in the bottom left corner. Luckily `engo` has six useful
functions to deal with the size of the screen:

* `engo.WindowWidth()` gives the current width of the game window
* `engo.GameWidth()` is the size of the game (meaning what was passed as
  parameters in engo.RunOptions)
* `engo.CanvasWidth()` gives the current width of the openGL Frame Buffer.

Each of these functions also have the corresponding Height variation.

Because we are building a HUD, we are not interested in how large our in-game
map is. We are only interested in how big the window itself is. We shall be
using the `WindowHeight()`, and subtracting the height of our HUD (in this case
`200`).

{% highlight go %}
type HUD struct {
	ecs.BasicEntity
	engo.RenderComponent
	engo.SpaceComponent
}
{% endhighlight %}

{% highlight go %}
hud := HUD{BasicEntity: ecs.NewBasic()}
hud.SpaceComponent = engo.SpaceComponent{
      Position: engo.Point{0, engo.WindowHeight() - 200},
      Width:    200,
      Height:   200,
}
{% endhighlight %}

#### RenderComponent

Now we know *where* to draw it, let's talk about *what* we're going to draw. We
could be creating a 200x200 image filled with a white background. This is
usually the best way to go, since you can easily add additional effects in your
image editing environment. Luckily, `engo` does not rely on files alone to
provide the textures. The common package has a function called
`common.NewTextureSingle(img common.Image)`. This allows you to create a texture
by providing a `common.Image`.

> ##### Not image.Image
> Note that this is not the same `Image` as in `image.Image`. `common.Image`
> requires three methods: `Data() interface{}`, `Width() int` and
> `Height() int`. In order to use `image.Image`, we need to convert it using
> `common.NewImageObject(img)`.

As noted, we are indeed going to use our own `image.Image`, and then cast it in
order to transform it to a `Texture`.

It is a bit verbose at the moment, so we're not going in too much depth into this:

{% highlight go %}
hudImage := image.NewUniform(color.RGBA{205, 205, 205, 255})
hudNRGBA := common.ImageToNRGBA(hudImage, 200, 200)
hudImageObj := common.NewImageObject(hudNRGBA)
hudTexture := engo.NewTextureSingle(hudImageObj)

hud.RenderComponent = engo.NewRenderComponent(
  hudTexture,
  engo.Point{1, 1},
  "hud",
)
{% endhighlight %}

But if we were to add this `RenderComponent` to our entity, and add the entity to our world, we would notice that this
is no HUD yet. As we predicted, it moves around as the camera moves. This is because we haven't set the correct
`Shader` yet. We also set the Z-index of our UI to a higher number, so it's
always on top of anything else on the screen.

> ##### Shader
> A shader roughly is a program which is being executed on the (hundreds /
> thousands of) GPU cores, in order to graphically render your texture. Engo
> has two you can use without much effort: `common.DefaultShader` (which,
> surprisingly, is the default), and the `common.HUDShader`.

We shall be using the `HUDShader` now:

{% highlight go %}
hud.RenderComponent.SetShader(common.HUDShader)
hud.RenderComponent.SetZIndex(1)

// And finally add it to the world:
for _, system := range world.Systems() {
  switch sys := system.(type) {
    case *engo.RenderSystem:
      sys.Add(&hud.BasicEntity, &hud.RenderComponent, &hud.SpaceComponent)
  }
}
{% endhighlight %}

That's it! If we put these lines of code in our `Setup()` function, our game
will have a 200x200px HUD with gray-ish background, which does not move around
as we move around with our camera. You may have noticed that a 200x200px HUD is
a bit large for a 400x400ox window. You may want to change the window dimensions
to something a bit bigger, 800x800px for instance. If you have any cool thoughts
on how to handle resizing / different resolutions in an orderly fashion, please
tell us by [creating an issue at GitHub](https://github.com/EngoEngine/engo/issues/new)!
