---
layout: tutorial
title: Tilemaps
permalink: /tutorials/05-tilemaps
number: 5
---

In this tutorial, we will use a tmx file to render our background tiles. We're
also going to set our CameraBounds to the size of the map so we can pan the
whole map.

> #### Recap
> Remember what we did in [the last tutorial](/tutorials/04-hud)? <br>
> We added a solid colored box to the bottom left of the screen, and set the
> shader so that it acted as an HUD element that doesn't move as the camera
> pans.

> #### Final Code
> The final code **for tutorial 5** is available
> [here at GitHub](https://github.com/EngoEngine/TrafficManager/tree/05-tilemaps).

### Why Use Tilemaps?

Tilemaps are essentially just files that tell the game where the sprites are
located on the disk and where to place them on the screen. A useful tool for
building tilemaps is the [Tiled Map Editor](https://www.mapeditor.org), which
produces .tmx files. The common library has the ability to read and load .tmx
files, and placement is as easy as reading it and looping through all the tiles.

### The .tmx files

The .tmx file used for this tutorial, as well as the accompanying images can be
downloaded [here](/img/tutorials/05/tilemap.zip). Extract it into your game's
assets folder.

### Loading the .tmx Resource

First we're going to load the tile map during our scene's Preload

> Note: `engo.Files.Load()` can take any number of strings as an argument, so
> rather than calling it multiple times, we can just append the new file to the
> call we're already making

{% highlight go %}
engo.Files.Load("textures/city.png", "tilemap/TrafficMap.tmx")
{% endhighlight %}

Then we'll retrieve it in the scene's Setup. We have to cast it as a
`common.TMXResource` so we can access the fields inside.

{% highlight go %}
resource, err := engo.Files.Resource("tilemap/TrafficMap.tmx")
if err != nil {
  panic(err)
}
tmxResource := resource.(common.TMXResource)
levelData := tmxResource.Level
{% endhighlight %}

### Unpacking the Tilemap into Entities

Now that we have the level data, we need to unpack it into entities we can use
for our RenderSystem. To do this we'll make a struct to contain the data required

{% highlight go %}
type Tile struct {
  ecs.BasicEntity
  common.RenderComponent
  common.SpaceComponent
}
{% endhighlight %}

Then, after you've unpacked the level data you'll want to loop through it and
fill the tiles.

> Note: Our .tmx file only has TileLayers, however you can also loop through
> ImageLayers, etc. if you need to in the same way.

{% highlight go %}
tiles := make([]*Tile, 0)
for _, tileLayer := range levelData.TileLayers {
  for _, tileElement := range tileLayer.Tiles {
    if tileElement.Image != nil {
      tile := &Tile{BasicEntity: ecs.NewBasic()}
      tile.RenderComponent = common.RenderComponent{
        Drawable: tileElement,
        Scale:    engo.Point{1, 1},
      }
      tile.SpaceComponent = common.SpaceComponent{
        Position: tileElement.Point,
        Width:    0,
        Height:   0,
      }
      tiles = append(tiles, tile)
    }
  }
}
// add the tiles to the RenderSystem
for _, system := range world.Systems() {
  switch sys := system.(type) {
  case *common.RenderSystem:
    for _, v := range tiles {
      sys.Add(&v.BasicEntity, &v.RenderComponent, &v.SpaceComponent)
    }
  }
}
{% endhighlight %}

Now, if you run the game the tiles for your map should render to the screen.

### Setting the CameraBounds to the Tilemap Bounds

All that's left is to set your camera's bounds to the tilemap. We can do that
with `levelData.Bounds()`, which gives the boundaries of your tilemap.

{% highlight go %}
common.CameraBounds = levelData.Bounds()
{% endhighlight %}

Congratulations! You've added a tilemap to your game!
